---
title: "AAA"
date: 2025-04-25
---

Link: https://atcoder.jp/contests/abc401/tasks/abc401_f/editorial

//I believe this is a good problem for introducing diameter concepts to people learning trees I 


Abridged statement: "You are given 2 unweighted trees, for each pair of vertices, you connect the 2 trees via 2 vertices and form a big tree. Find the sum of the diameters of all the big trees formed"



Note: diameter is the maximum distance between 2 vertices in a tree

We first consider what happens when we join the 2 trees (call them trees A and B) via vertices u and v (located on trees A and B respectively) and form a big tree.

Naive method: 
For each possible pair of u and v, we manually construct out the big tree by adding the edge u-v.
We then proceed to find the diameter of the big tree for all N_1 x N_2 pairs of vertices using the diameter algorithm mentioned later in the blog, before summing all of them up.

Time complexity: O(N_1 * N_2 * (N_1+N_2))

TLE



Optimized method:

Observe that the resulting diameter of the big tree must be 1 of the 3 possible values:

1) The diameter of tree A
   
2) The diameter of tree B
   
3) The longest distance to vertex u in A + longest distance to vertex v in B + 1
(the +1 is due to the distance of edge u-v)

The diameter of trees A and B can be obtained via the following algorithm: 

DFS from any vertex to find the vertex furthest away from it. Label this vertex V0.

DFS from V0 to find the vertex furthest away from it. Label this vertex V1.

The distance from V0 to V1 is the diameter of the tree.

(Proof is classic. Trust me bro it's actually the case this time)

OR 

you can code a dynamic programming method but IDL it and the 2 DFS method is more convenient for the next part of the problem. 


The next observation is that the diameter of trees A and B will remain constant, whereas the longest distance to vertex u in A and the longest distance to vertex v in B are dependent on vertex u and v. Naively traversing the whole tree to find the vertex furthest from u in tree A or v in tree B would be too inefficient. Hence we encountered a new problem to tackle.

"Given a vertex in the tree, find the maximum distance from it to another node in the tree".

To solve this, we can apply a property of the diameter of the tree. 
This property states that:

"Let a,b be the two ends of the diameter. For all vertices in the tree, their furthest vertex is either a or b."


Proof:
Suppose that the furthest vertex from a random vertex u is c, where c is neither a nor b. 

Due to the structure of a tree, there will always exist a vertex connecting the 4 branches belonging to a,b,c and u. 

Let us denote this vertex as x (Note: u can be x too). 

To travel from u to a,b or c, we will have to go from u to x then x to a,b or c (there is only 1 simple path between any 2 nodes in a tree, hence this is guaranteed). 

Similarly, to get from a to b, we will have to go from a to x, then x to b. 

However, if c is the furthest vertex from u, then the distance x-c is greater than both the distance x-b and x-a. 

This thus implies that distance a-x + x-c or b-x + x-c will be greater than a-x + x-b, and that a and b will no longer be the 2 ends of the diameter.

Thus a contradiction is achieved and we can conclude that that property is true. 



Notice that while doing our 2 DFS method of finding the diameter of trees A and B, we can also easily keep track of the 2 ends of the diameter for each tree. For each tree, we can then run another 2 DFS, each starting from one end of the diameter until the distances to every vertex from the 2 ends are recorded down. The maximum distance of each vertex to any other vertex in the tree would then be the max of the 2 distances to the ends of the diameter. This allows us to precompute the max distances from vertex u and v to another node in trees A and B respectively in just O(N_1+N_2) time, and look up the value in O(1) time. 


Our next observation is that the (longest distance to vertex u in A) + (longest distance to vertex v in B) + 1 will be 
< max(diameter of A, diameter of B) if (longest distance to vertex u in A) or (longest distance to vertex v in B) gets too small.
Thus we could sort the values of (longest distance to vertex u in A) in ascending order (call it vector D_u) and (longest distance to vertex v in B) in descending order (call it vector D_v).


Following that, we can apply 2 pointers technique to quickly compute the sums of the diameter in the big tree. 
As we iterate through vector D_u via pointer i, we keep a pointer p in vector D_v. 
When D_u[i] + D_v[p] + 1 > max(diameter of A, diameter of B), the diameter of the big tree will be D_u[i] + D_v[p] + 1, thus we increment the answer by D_u[i] + D_v[p] + 1. 


However, as D_v is decreasing, there will be a point of time when D_u[i] + D_v[i] + 1 < max(diameter of A, diameter of B). 
Thus for all N_2 - p values of D_v following that, the sum will be incremented by the fixed amount of max(diameter of A, diameter of B).
i is then incremented and D_u[i] increases. As such a larger D_v[i] is required for D_u[i] + D_v[p] + 1 > max(diameter of A, diameter of B).
We will thus continue to add D_u[i] + D_v[p] + 1 to the sum as p gets incremented. 

(Note: you might required to keep the sum of the prefix of D_v[p] as you increment p to help with calculating the final sum via algebra. The algebra shall be left out of here as idk how to type math equations here yet 🤡. I believe that if you make it this far, you should easily get what I am referring to) 


p can continue to be incremented until the inequality is no longer satisfied, which is when we add (N_2-p)*max(diameter of A, diameter of B) to the sum instead. 

This whole process continues as long as i and p are within N_1 and N_2 respectively. This process is thus amortized and can be done in O(N_1+N_2) time.

Thus the final time complexity is just O(N_1 log (N_1) + N_2 log(N_2)) which passes the question easily as N_1,N_2 <= 2e5 . 

//Help this is way longer and messier than I expected it to be 💀🤡.

//my code: https://atcoder.jp/contests/abc401/submissions/64955249




